The Java Platform - An Introduction

A computer only understands binary code, which are sequences of 0’s and 1’s (called bits). All instructions to a computer should be converted to 0’s and 1’s before execution.

When we wrote our code in JShell, how was it converted to binary code?

We write our programs in a high-level language, such as Java, as it is easier to learn, remember and maintain.

Who converts it to binary code?

Typically, Compiler is a program which understands the syntax of your programming language and converts it into binary code.

Java designers wanted it to be Platform independent. Compile the code once and run it anywhere.

However, different Operating Systems have different instruction sets - different binary code.

Java provides an interesting solution:

All Java compilers translate source code to an intermediate representation ( bytecode ).
To run Java programs (bytecode), you need a JVM (Java Virtual Machine).
JVM understands bytecode and runs it.
There are different JVM's for different operating systems. Windows JVM converts bytecode into Windows executable instructions. Linux JVM converts bytecode into Linux executable instructions.
The Java compiler translates Java source code to bytecode, which is stored as a .class file on the computer.

Summary
In this step, we:

Understood the role of the Java compiler in translating source code
Realized the need for an Intermediate Representation (IR) such as bytecode
Understood how the (Compiler + JVM + OS) combination ensure source code portability
